\input texinfo
@c -*-texinfo-*-

@c %**start of header
@setfilename guile-libnotify.info
@documentencoding UTF-8
@settitle Guile Libnotify Reference Manual
@c %**end of header

@include version.texi

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2023 Ekaitz Zarraga

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A
copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free
Documentation License''.
@end copying

@dircategory The Algorithmic Language Scheme
@direntry
* Guile Libnotify: (notify).
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Guile Libnotify Manual
@author Ekaitz

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Edition @value{EDITION} @*
@value{UPDATED} @*

@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@c *********************************************************************
@node Top
@top Guile Libnotify: (notify)

This document describes Guile Libnotify version @value{VERSION}.

@menu
* Introduction::                What is libnotify
* Installation::                How to install
* How to use::                  How to use Guile-Libnotify
* Example::                     Usage example
* Development::                 Taking part and improving Guile-Libnotify
@end menu

@c *********************************************************************
@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

Libnotify is a GNOME library for desktop notifications that follow the
FreeDesktop standard for notifications. This project provides Guile bindings
for Libnotify.

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

With Guix you can just:

@example
$ guix install -f guix.scm
@end example

If you want to develop or install it in a different distribution you have to do
all from source @ref{Building from source}.

@node Dependencies
@section Dependencies

@subsection Run-time dependencies

@itemize
@item
@code{libnotify}
@item
@code{glib}
@end itemize

@subsection Development dependencies

@itemize
@item
@code{autoconf}
@item
@code{automake}
@item
@code{pkg-config}
@item
@code{texinfo}
@item
@code{make}
@end itemize

@node Building from source
@section Building from source

Like other GNU projects you can build this using autotools and make.
Make sure you have the dependencies (both run-time and dev) installed.

@example
$ ./bootstrap.sh
$ ./configure
$ make
@end example

If you wish to install you can @command{make install}, too. It may require
sudo.

@node How to use
@chapter How to use

First, import the module.

@example
(use-modules (notify))
@end example

Also, you should take a look to the Notification Spec by Freedesktop, as it
describes everything libnotify is able to deal with.

@url{https://specifications.freedesktop.org/notification-spec/latest/}

@node Initialization
@section Initialization

First you need to initialize the notification context. Use @code{notify-init}
for that.

@deffn {Procedure} notify-init #:key app-name

Initializes the notification context. Should be uninitialized with
@code{notify-uninit}.

@itemize
@item
@var{app-name}: String with the name of the application
@end itemize
@end deffn

@deffn {Procedure} notify-uninit

Uninitializes the notification context that has been previously initialized
with @code{notify-init}.

@end deffn


@node Creating notifications
@section Creating notifications

Once the notification context is created you can generate notifications using
@code{notification-new}.

@deffn {Procedure} notification-new summary #:key body icon

Creates a new notification object.

@itemize
@item
@var{summary}: The summary message of the notification
@item
@var{body}: Optional body
@item
@var{icon}: Optional icon url
@end itemize
@end deffn

Once created, notifications can be manipulated with a set of functions.

@deffn {Procedure} notification-update notification summary #:key body icon

Updates an existing notification object.

@itemize
@item
@var{notification}: Notification to update. Create them with
@code{notification-new}
@item
@var{summary}: The summary message of the notification
@item
@var{body}: Optional body
@item
@var{icon}: Optional icon url
@end itemize
@end deffn

@node Showing and closing notifications
@section Showing and closing notifications

Also you can show the notification or close an open one.

@deffn {Procedure} notification-show notification

Show the notification.

@itemize
@item
@var{notification}: Notification to show.
@end itemize
@end deffn

@deffn {Procedure} notification-close notification

Close the notification.

@itemize
@item
@var{notification}: Notification to close.
@end itemize
@end deffn


@node Configuring the notification
@section Configuring the notification


@deffn {Procedure} notification-set-timeout notification timeout

Set notification's timeout time. The time that the notification will live until
it is closed, that is.

@itemize
@item
@var{notification}: Notification to set the timeout to
@item
@var{timeout}: Timeout to set in milliseconds or @code{never} or @code{default}
@end itemize
@end deffn


@deffn {Procedure} notification-set-urgency notification urgency

Set notification's urgency.

@itemize
@item
@var{notification}: Notification to set the urgency to
@item
@var{urgency}: @code{low}, @code{normal} or @code{critical}
@end itemize
@end deffn


@deffn {Procedure} notification-set-urgency notification category

Set notification's category.

@itemize
@item
@var{notification}: Notification to set the category to
@item
@var{cetegory}: The category (string)
@end itemize
@end deffn



@node Manipulating hints
@section Manipulating hints

@dfn{Hints} are a way to provide extra data to a notification server that the
server may be able to make use of.

Currently Guile-Libnotify does not support @code{image-data} hint, and it does
not support any of the deprecated hints of the standard.

@deffn {Procedure} notification-set-hint notification key value

Set notification's hint.

@itemize
@item
@var{notification}: Notification to set the hint to
@item
@var{key}: The hint to set (symbol)
@item
@var{value}: The value of the hint to set. Use the most reasonable type for it:
booleans for booleans, strings for strings and so on.
@end itemize
@end deffn

You can also clear all the hints you set before.

@deffn {Procedure} notification-clear-hints notification

Remove all notification's hints.

@itemize
@item
@var{notification}: Notification to remove the hints from
@end itemize
@end deffn


@node User interaction
@section User interaction

There are two ways to interact with the user: Actions and detecting when the
user closes the notification.

User interaction is asynchronous by nature. Guile-Libnotify makes use of the
same underlying mechanism Libnotify uses for asynchronous event control: Glib's
main loop. That is explained later in @ref{Running the main loop}.

@node Actions
@subsection Actions

@dfn{Actions} represent possible interactions user might do, normally rendered
as a button in the notification. Actions require support from the notification
manager.

@deffn {Procedure}notification-add-action notification @
    action label callback user-data free-func

Add a new action to the notification. When the action is taken the callback
function will be called.

@itemize
@item
@var{notification}: Notification to add the action to
@item
@var{action}: The action ID
@item
@var{label}: Human readable action label
@item
@var{callback}: A procedure to call when the action is triggered. It'll get
three arguments: the @var{notification}, the @var{action} and the
@var{user-data}.
@item
@var{user-data}: Arbitrary user data that will be sent to the callback. You are
responsible for keeping the data in the same memory address and not garbage
collected.
@item
@var{free-func}: A procedure to be called when the notification is cleared.
It's goal is to clear user-data. It will get one argument: @code{user-data}.
@end itemize
@end deffn


@deffn {Procedure} notification-clear-actions notification

Remove all notification's actions.

@itemize
@item
@var{notification}: Notification to remove the actions from
@end itemize
@end deffn

@node Closed signal
@subsection Closed signal

The other way is to react to when the user closes the notification. For that,
you need to use the underlaying Glib mechanism to connect a function to the
@code{closed} signal. This is explained in @ref{Glib related functionality}.

@node Glib related functionality
@section Glib related functionality

Some of Libnotify's functionality, mostly user interaction, requires using
Glib's machinery. Guile-Libnotify provides the minimal set of definitions to
deal with Glib from Guile easily.

@example
(use-modules (notify glib))
@end example

@node Connecting signals
@subsection Connecting signals

@dfn{Signals} are the way Glib connects actions that happen in the program with
callbacks. In our case we only use them to capture when the notification is
closed.

@deffn {Procedure} g-signal-connect object signal callback data

Connects @var{object}'s @var{signal} to @var{callback}, sending also some
extra @var{data}. It returns a @var{handler-id} that can be used to remove
this connection calling @code{g-signal-disconnect}.

@itemize
@item
@var{object}: Object to connect to. In our case, a notification.
@item
@var{signal}: String with the name of the signal. In our case: @code{"closed"}
@item
@var{callback}: Procedure to call when the signal is triggered
@item
@var{data}: Data to send to the @var{callback} procedure. You are responsible
for keeping the data in the same memory address and not garbage collected.
@end itemize
@end deffn

@deffn {Procedure} g-signal-disconnect object handler-id

Disconnects (removes) the connection identified by @code{handler-id}

@itemize
@item
@var{object}: Object to disconnect from. In our case, a notification.
@item
@var{handler-id}: A signal indentifier, obtained from
@code{g-signal-disconnect}
@end itemize
@end deffn


@node Running the main loop
@subsection Running the main loop

The @dfn{Main Loop} is the mechanism GLib provides to wait for events happening
in the notification (it's an event loop, like the one in JavaScript or Libuv).
If you want to listen to actions or signals, you must use an event loop.

First, the Main Loop must be created.

@deffn {Procedure} g-main-loop-new

Creates a new Main Loop and returns it.

@end deffn


Once created, the Main Loop can be run. That will give the control to the event
loop. It will listen to the actions but your execution thread will be captured
by the event loop.

@deffn {Procedure} g-main-loop-run loop

Runs the provided loop

@itemize
@item
@var{loop}: A Main Loop to run.
@end itemize
@end deffn

If you want to stop the event loop to let your program continue, you can stop
the Main Loop.

@deffn {Procedure} g-main-loop-quit loop

Quits the provided loop, stopping it and recovering the execution thread.

@itemize
@item
@var{loop}: A Main Loop to stop.
@end itemize
@end deffn

@deffn {Procedure} g-main-loop-is-running loop

Returns @code{#t} if @var{loop} is running, @code{#f} otherwise.

@itemize
@item
@var{loop}: A Main Loop to check.
@end itemize
@end deffn



@node Example
@chapter Example

@example
(use-modules (notify)
             (notify glib))

(notify-init #:app-name "notify.scm")
(define noti (notification-new "Problem!" #:body "Device died!"))
(notification-set-category noti "device.error")
(notification-set-hint noti 'image-path "file:///home/Ekaitz/clip.png")
(notification-set-hint noti 'urgency 3)

(let ((loop (g-main-loop-new)))
  (notification-add-action noti
                           "default-action"
                           "Close the notification"
                           (lambda (notification action data)
                             (display "action\n")
                             (g-main-loop-quit loop))
                           #f
                           identity)
  (g-signal-connect noti "closed" (lambda _ (display "closed")) #f)
  (notification-show noti)
  (g-main-loop-run loop))
(notify-uninit)
@end example






@node Development
@chapter Development

If you wish to test the code in your development environment, the tools should
provide you a @command{pre-inst-env} script that enables you to set all the
environment libraries you need:

@example
./pre-inst-env
@end example

On top of that, taking part in the project is similar to any GNU project. You
can send your patches to the maintainer (see the email in the commits) or in
the Github mirror.

@bye
